manual: More on stores, building and mounting in the file system (#14699)
NixOS/nix: doc/manual/source/store/building.md

# Building

As discussed in the [main page on derivations](./derivation/index.md):

> A derivation is a specification for running an executable on precisely defined input to produce one or more [store objects][store object].

This page describes *building* a derivation, which is to say following the instructions in the derivation to actually run the executable.
In some cases the derivation is self-explanatory.
For example, the arguments specified in the derivation really are the arguments passed to the executable.

> In other cases, however, there is additional procedure true for all derivations, which is therefore *not* specified in the derivation.

Reviewer: I don't really know what "procedure" refers to.

This page specifies this invariant procedure that is true for all derivations, too.

The chief design consideration for the building process is *determinism*.
Conventional operating systems are typically not designed with determinism in mind.
But determinism is needed to make Nix's caching a transparent abstraction.

> **Explanation**
>
> For example, no one wants to slightly modify a derivation, and then find that it no longer builds for an unrelated reason, because the original derivation *also* doesn't build anymore, but the cache hit on the original derivation was hiding this.

> > We want builds that once succeed to continue succeeding, to encourage fearless modification of old build recipes.

Reviewer: More importantly, it ensures that something that builds on one machine to build on another machine, e.g. two developers will get the same result.

> Determinism is what enables things that once worked to keep working.

> The life cycle of a build can be broken down into 3 parts:

Reviewer 2: I think it's fine if we think of the building step as recursive via derivation resolution.

1. Spawn the builder process with the proper environment, including the correct process arguments, environment variables, and file system state.

2. Wait for the standard output and error of the process to be closed and/or the process to exit.
   (If the standard streams are closed but the process hasn't exited, Nix will kill the process.)

   Nix also logs the standard output and error of the process, but this is just for human convenience and does not influence the behavior of the system.

>    (Builder processes have no idea what the consumer of their standard output and error does with those streams, only that they are indeed consumed so buffers do not fill up and writes to them will continue to succeed.)

Reviewer 2: Not sure this is totally correct, build tools technically might behave differently depending on whether they are outputting to a PTY/pipe/file?

3. Processing the outputs after the builder has exited.

>    The builder process on exit should have left beyond files for each output the derivation is supposed to produce.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The builder process on exit should have left behind files for each output the derivation is supposed to produce.
```

   The files must be processed to turn them into bona fide store objects.
   If the processing suceeds, those store objects are associated with the derivation as (the results of) a successful build.

> Step (3) happens externally, with just inert data since the process has exited or been killed by then.

Reviewer: "externally" is vague. External to what?

Reviewer 2: Indeed, probably worth saying that is just done by Nix itself.

> Step (1) however is best described not from Nix's perspective, but from the process's perspective.

Reviewer: "Process" is also vague. The "build process" in general, or is that "process" in the OS sense?

> **Explanation**
>
> Ultimately, what matters for determinism is the behavior of IO operations that the process attempts (whether these are successes or failures), because of how they affect the output files, and how they affect the further execution of the builder process.

> > From Nix (and the operating system)'s perspective, there are many, many different ways --- different implementation strategies --- of effecting the same I/O behavior,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> From Nix (and the operating system)'s perspective, there are many, many different ways — different implementation strategies — of effecting the same I/O behavior.
```
Not sure if markdown `---` produces an actual em-dash.

> > But from the process's perspective, there is only one correct behavior.

Reviewer: TBH I didn't understand this paragraph.

## What derivations can be built

Actually only some derivations are ready to be built.

> In particular, only [*resolved*](./resolution.md) derivations can be built.

Reviewer: Should probably read "Before derivations can be built, they need to be resolved".

> That is to say, a derivation that depends on other derivations is not ready yet to be built, because those other derivations might not be built.

Reviewer 2: This is quite repetive. Maybe "some of its dependencies are not realised"

If the other derivations are indeed built, we can witness this fact by resolving the derivation, and converting all the derivation's input references into plain store paths.

> **Note**
>
> Note that [input-addressing](derivation/outputs/input-address.md) derivations are improperly resolved.
> As discussed on the linked page, the current input-addressing algorithm does not respect resolution-equivalence of derivations (\\(\\sim_\mathrm{Drv}\\)).
> That means that if Nix properly resolved an input-addressed derivation, the resolved derivation would have different input addresses, violating expectations.

> > Nix therefore improperly resolves the derivation, keeping its original input address output paths, creating an invalid derivation that is both resolved and instructed to create the outputs at the originally expected paths.

Reviewer 2: Hm I think John is referring to the slightly hacky `BasicDerivation` -> `Derivation` upcasting which keeps the old outPath, yet the ATerm serialisation is different, so the outPath is inconsistent (between what's in the BasicDerivation and what would have been calculated otherwise).

> > Nix therefore improperly resolves the derivation, keeping its original input address output paths, creating an invalid derivation that is both resolved and instructed to create the outputs at the originally expected paths.

Author: Yup, it makes a derivation that requires being a trusted user to use, because it is not self-authenticating. That's certainly a deficiency!

## Environment of the builder process

The [`builder`](./derivation/index.md#builder) is executed as follows:

### File system

> The builder should have access to a limited file system where only certain objects are available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The builder may have access to a limited file system where only certain store objects are available.
```
or more specifically, "only the store paths that it depends on".

"may" because sandboxing is not required.

The most important exposed files are the inputs (other store objects) of the (resolved) derivation.
Additionally, some other files are exposed.

#### Store inputs

> The builder will be run against a file system in which the [closure] of the inputs is mounted inside the [store directory][store directory path].

Reviewer 2: Yeah probably worth clarifying that only the build closure is accessible - be it via bind mounts or macos sandbox.

> The builder will be run against a file system in which the [closure] of the inputs is mounted inside the [store directory][store directory path].

Author: Should be fixed now, I used "place". I didn't say "only" because of the no-sandboxing case described below.

In particular, consider a store that just contains this closure.
That store may be exposed to the file system according to the rules specified in the [Exposing Store Objects in OS File Systems](./store-path.md#exposing) documentation.
This precisely defines the file system layout of the store that should be visible to the builder process.

> **Note**
>

> > Historically, Nix exposed *at least* the following store contents to the builder, but also arbitrarily other store objects, due to limitations around operating systems' file system virtualization capabilities, and wanting to avoid copying or moving files.

Reviewer: We shouldn't use the word "Historically" if it's still the case today. We're not documenting platonic ideal Nix :-)

> It still can do this in so-called *unsandboxed* builds.
>

> > Such builds should be considered an unsafe extension, but one that works less badly against non-malicious derivations than might be expected.

Reviewer: "Unsafe" is not the right word here. It's just worse for determinism/reproducibility, but then we can never guarantee those entirely anyway.

> This is because store paths are relatively unpredictable, so a well-behaved program is unlikely to stumble upon a store object it wasn't supposed to know about.
>
> As operating systems developed better file system primitives, the need for disabling sandboxing has lessened greatly over the years, and this trend should continue into the future.

[realised]: @docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-realise
[closure]: @docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-closure
[store directory path]: ./store-path.md#store-directory-path

### Other file system state

> - The current working directory of the builder process will be a fresh temporary directory that is initially empty.

Reviewer 2: i.e. structured attrs and passAsFile attributes

> - The current working directory of the builder process will be a fresh temporary directory that is initially empty.

Author: Explicitly mentioned now.

  (A pseudo terminal would not be strictly necessary since the standard streams are passively logging, not there to facilitate interaction.
  But it is still useful to entice programs to do nicer logging with e.g. colors etc.)

- On Linux: Process information via `/proc`

- Minimal user and group identity information

- A loopback-only network configuration with hostname set to `localhost`

> **Note**
>
> Fixed-output derivations have access to additional operating system state to facilitate communication with the outside world, such as network name resolution and TLS certificate verification.
> This is necessary because these derivations are allowed to access the network, unlike regular derivations which are fully sandboxed.

### Environment variables {#env-vars}

The environment is cleared and set to the derivation attributes, as
specified above.

For most derivations types this must contain at least:

- For each output declared in `outputs`, the corresponding environment variable is set to point to the intended path in the Nix store for that output.
  Each output path is a concatenation of the cryptographic hash of all build inputs, the `name` attribute and the output name.

>   (The output name is omitted if it’s `out`.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (The output name is omitted if it's `out`.)
```

  A detailed explanation of this behavior can be found in the [section about structured attrs](@docroot@/language/advanced-attributes.md#adv-attr-structuredAttrs).

## Builder Execution

- If an output path already exists, it is removed.
  Also, locks are acquired to prevent multiple [Nix instances][Nix instance] from performing the same build at the same time.

- A log of the combined standard output and error is written to `/nix/var/log/nix`.

- The builder is executed with the arguments specified by the attribute `args`.
  If it exits with exit code 0, it is considered to have succeeded.

- The temporary directory is removed (unless the [`--keep-failed`](@docroot@/command-ref/opt-common.md#opt-keep-failed) option was specified).

## Processing outputs

If the builder exited successfully, the following steps happen in order to turn the output directories left behind by the builder into proper store objects:

- **Normalize the file permissions**

  The files must conform to the model described in the [Exposing in OS file systems](./file-system-object/os-file-system.md) section.

>   For example, timestamps and permissions must be forced to sentinel values.

Reviewer: Not sure if "sentinel value" is the right term. More like "canonical value".

- **Calculate the references**

>   Nix scans each output path for references to input store objects by looking for the store path digests of each input.

Reviewer 2: Definitely needs a reference and `hash part` is the more common term yeah.

  Likewise, a digest not preceded by the [store directory path] also still scans as a reference.)
  Since these are potential runtime dependencies, Nix will register them as references of the output store object they occur in.

  Nix also scans for references from one output to another in the same way, because outputs are allowed to refer to each other.
  If the outputs' references to each other form a cycle, this is an error, because the references of store objects much be acyclic.

  In the case of derivations with fixed in advance output paths (i.e. [input-addressing] derivations, or [fixed content-addressing] derivations), the actual final store path to each output is used during the build.
  For [floating content-addressing] derivations, however, the final store path is not known in advance by definition.
  Scratch store paths must therefore be used instead.
  Scanning will use those scratch paths, but then any output-to-be that contains such a scanned scratch path must be rewritten to instead use the final (content-addressed) path of the output in question.

> At this point, the file system data is in the proper form, and the valid acyclic reference data for each output is also calculated, so the outputs can be registered as proper store objects, and associated with the derivation in the [build trace] in the record for a successful build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, the file system data is in the proper form. Nix then computes the references for each output, so the outputs can be registered as proper store objects. References must form an acyclic graph.
```
(dropping the "build trace" since I don't know what that is)

Reviewer 2: Maybe it should say that they get registered (maybe worth mentioning the DB, but it's an implementation detail) in the store - that does include validity as well as the "build trace" - i.e. the mapping between the resolved derivation and the content addressed path that it produced (at least that's my understanding of the current state of CA).

# Building

As discussed in the [main page on derivations](./derivation/index.md):

> A derivation is a specification for running an executable on precisely defined input to produce one or more [store objects][store object].

This page describes *building* a derivation, which is to say following the instructions in the derivation to actually run the executable.
Some elements of derivations are self-explanatory.
For example, the arguments specified in the derivation really are the arguments passed to the executable.
In other cases, however, there is additional procedure true for all derivations, which is therefore *not* specified in the derivation.

> This page specifies this invariant procedure that is true for all derivations, too.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In other cases, however, there is additional common steps performed by Nix for all derivations - mostly for setting up the build environment and collecting the built outputs.
```

Something along these lines would be much clearer.

If the other derivations are indeed all built, we can witness this fact by resolving the derivation, and converting all the derivation's input references into plain store paths.

> **Note**
>
> Note that [input-addressing](derivation/outputs/input-address.md) derivations are improperly resolved.
> As discussed on the linked page, the current input-addressing algorithm does not respect resolution-equivalence of derivations (\\(\\sim_\mathrm{Drv}\\)).
> That means that if Nix properly resolved an input-addressed derivation, the resolved derivation would have different input addresses, violating expectations.
> Nix therefore improperly resolves the derivation, keeping its original input address output paths, creating an invalid derivation that is both resolved and instructed to create the outputs at the originally expected paths.

## Environment of the builder process

The [`builder`](./derivation/index.md#builder) is executed as follows:

### File system

The builder should have access to a limited file system where only certain objects are available.
The most important exposed files are the inputs (other store objects) of the (resolved) derivation.

> Additionally, some other files are exposed.

Reviewer 2: Can we add a reference to the definition of `resolved` derivations?

Author: It is linked when it first occurs two paragraph up. Is that good enough?

(I miss docbook XML where you could mark the keyword every time, and it would automatically figure out the first occurrence.)

#### Store inputs

The builder will be run against a file system in which the [closure] of the inputs is placed inside the [store directory][store directory path].
In particular, consider a store that just contains this closure.
That store may be exposed to the file system according to the rules specified in the [Exposing Store Objects in OS File Systems](./store-path.md#exposing) documentation.
This precisely defines the file system layout of the store that should be visible to the builder process.

> **Note**
>
> Historically, Nix exposed *at least* the following store contents to the builder, but also arbitrarily other store objects, due to limitations around operating systems' file system virtualization capabilities, and wanting to avoid copying or moving files.
> It still can do this in so-called *unsandboxed* builds.
>

> > Such builds should be considered an unsafe extension, but one that works less badly against non-malicious derivations than might be expected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Such builds should be considered discouraged, but one that works less badly against non-malicious derivations than might be expected.
```

> This is because store paths are relatively unpredictable, so a well-behaved program is unlikely to stumble upon a store object it wasn't supposed to know about.
>
> As operating systems developed better file system primitives, the need for disabling sandboxing has lessened greatly over the years, and this trend should continue into the future.

[realised]: @docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-realise
[closure]: @docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-closure
[store directory path]: ./store-path.md#store-directory-path

### Other file system state

> - The current working directory of the builder process will be a fresh temporary directory that only contains a few input files:

Reviewer 2: Do we mention anywhere that the temp directory resides at a deterministic path (in sandboxed builds) and that it becomes the current working directory of a builder?

  A detailed explanation of this behavior can be found in the [section about structured attrs](@docroot@/language/advanced-attributes.md#adv-attr-structuredAttrs).

## Builder Execution

- If an output path already exists, it is removed.
  Also, locks are acquired to prevent multiple [Nix instances][Nix instance] from performing the same build at the same time.

- A log of the combined standard output and error is written to `/nix/var/log/nix`.

- The builder is executed with the arguments specified by the attribute `args`.
  If it exits with exit code 0, it is considered to have succeeded.

- The temporary directory is removed (unless the [`--keep-failed`](@docroot@/command-ref/opt-common.md#opt-keep-failed) option was specified).

## Processing outputs

If the builder exited successfully, the following steps happen in order to turn the output directories left behind by the builder into proper store objects:

- **Normalize the file permissions**

  The files must conform to the model described in the [Exposing in OS file systems](./file-system-object/os-file-system.md) section.

>   For example, timestamps and permissions must be forced to sentinel values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  For example, timestamps and permissions are canonicalised.
```

- **Calculate the references**

  Nix scans each output path for references to input store objects by looking for the store path digests of each input.

>   (The name part is ignored when scanning; an input's hash part that is not followed by a `-` and the correct name part still scans as a reference.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  (The name part and the [store directory path] are ignored when scanning; an input's hash part that is not followed by a `-` and the correct name part still scans as a reference.
```

Author: ```suggestion
  (The name part and the [store directory path] are ignored when scanning; an input's hash part that is neither followed by a `-` nor proceeded by a `/` still scans as a reference.
```

>   Likewise, a digest not preceded by the [store directory path] also still scans as a reference.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

  Since these are potential runtime dependencies, Nix will register them as references of the output store object they occur in.

  Nix also scans for references from one output to another in the same way, because outputs are allowed to refer to each other.

>   If the outputs' references to each other form a cycle, this is an error, because the references of store objects must be acyclic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The outputs' references must form an acyclic graph.
```

Or DAG, don't know which one we prefer and have in the glossary.

>   In the case of derivations with output paths that are fixed in advance (i.e. [input-addressing] derivations, or [fixed content-addressing] derivations), the actual final store path to each output is used during the build.

Reviewer 2: That's also not the case when we don't have mount namespaces.

Author: What do you mean? I thought without chrooting we would move the old stuff out of the way?

Reviewer 2: Scratch paths are used in those cases.

Author: ```suggestion
  In the case of derivations with output paths that are fixed in advance (i.e. [input-addressing] derivations, or [fixed content-addressing] derivations), the actual final store path to each output is used during the build if possible.
```
The repair scratch path case case kinda spooks me as a not very sound hack, since the problems we can have with typewriting. What do you think about this?

Reviewer 2: Makes sense yeah. It's indeed not entirely sound.

  For [floating content-addressing] derivations, however, the final store path is not known in advance by definition.
  Scratch store paths must therefore be used instead.
  Scanning will use those scratch paths, but then any output-to-be that contains such a scanned scratch path must be rewritten to instead use the final (content-addressed) path of the output in question.

> At this point, the file system data is in the proper form, and the valid acyclic reference data for each output is also calculated, so the outputs are added to the store as proper store objects.

Reviewer 2: What does "proper store objects" mean?

Author: ```suggestion
At this point, the file system data is in the proper form, and the valid acyclic reference data for each output is also calculated, so the outputs are added to the store as store objects.
```
can just drop proper if you like.

> As discussed on the linked page, the current input-addressing algorithm does not respect resolution-equivalence of derivations (\\(\\sim_\mathrm{Drv}\\)).
> That means that if Nix properly resolved an input-addressed derivation, the resolved derivation would have different input addresses, violating expectations.
> Nix therefore improperly resolves the derivation, keeping its original input address output paths, creating an invalid derivation that is both resolved and instructed to create the outputs at the originally expected paths.

## Environment of the builder process

The [`builder`](./derivation/index.md#builder) is executed as follows:

### File system

The builder should have access to a limited file system where only certain objects are available.
The most important exposed files are the inputs (other store objects) of the (resolved) derivation.
Additionally, some other files are exposed.

#### Store inputs

The builder will be run against a file system in which the [closure] of the inputs is placed inside the [store directory][store directory path].
In particular, consider a store that just contains this closure.

> That store may be exposed to the file system according to the rules specified in the [Exposing Store Objects in OS File Systems](./store-path.md#exposing) documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That store is exposed to the file system according to the rules specified in the [Exposing Store Objects in OS File Systems](./store-path.md#exposing) documentation.
```

  This is to prevent the builder from accidentally writing temporary files anywhere else.
  Doing so might cause interference by other processes.

- `PATH` is set to `/path-not-set` to prevent shells from initialising it to their built-in default value.

- `HOME` is set to `/homeless-shelter`.
   (Without sandboxing, this serves as "soft sandboxing" --- it discourages programs from using `/etc/passwd` or the like to find the user's home directory, which could cause impurity.)
   Usually, when `HOME` is set, it is used as the location of the home directory, even if it points to a non-existent path.

- `NIX_STORE` is set to the path of the top-level Nix [store directory path] (typically, `/nix/store`).

- `NIX_ATTRS_JSON_FILE` & `NIX_ATTRS_SH_FILE` if `__structuredAttrs` is set to `true` for the derivation.
  A detailed explanation of this behavior can be found in the [section about structured attrs](@docroot@/language/advanced-attributes.md#adv-attr-structuredAttrs).

## Builder Execution

- If an output path already exists, it is removed.
  Also, locks are acquired to prevent multiple [Nix instances][Nix instance] from performing the same build at the same time.

> - A log of the combined standard output and error is written to `/nix/var/log/nix`.

Reviewer 2: The location is actually configurable. Not sure it's worth documenting the specifics too closely (ie that the directories are sharded and logs are bzip2 compressed). Also maybe worth nothing that the log is attached to the deriver's path.

Author: Oh yeah this is some old stuff I rather delete. The treatment of stdout and stderr is already described elsewhere, and where the logs go is not part of the building spec.

# Building

As discussed in the [main page on derivations](./derivation/index.md):

> > A derivation is a specification for running an executable on precisely defined input to produce one or more [store objects][store object].

Reviewer 2: This link is broken too

Step (1) however is best described not from Nix's perspective, but from the build process's perspective.

> **Explanation**
>
> Ultimately, what matters for determinism is what the build process can observe: what resources (files, networking, etc.) it can see, what syscalls succeed or fail, etc.
> Nix can achieve this through many different sandboxing strategies (namespaces, VMs, chroots, ...), but the process shouldn't be able to tell them apart.
> We therefore specify building from the process's perspective, not Nix's perspective, to focus on *what*, not *how*.

## What derivations can be built

Actually only some derivations are ready to be built.
In particular, only [*resolved*](./resolution.md) derivations can be built.
That is to say, a derivation that depends on other derivations is not ready yet to be built, because some of those other derivations might not have yet been built.
If the other derivations are indeed all built, we can witness this fact by resolving the derivation, and converting all the derivation's input references into plain store paths.

> **Note**
>
> Note that [input-addressing](derivation/outputs/input-address.md) derivations are improperly resolved.

> > As discussed on the linked page, the current input-addressing algorithm does not respect resolution-equivalence of derivations (\\(\\sim_\mathrm{Drv}\\)).

Reviewer 2: This really isn't rendering well in the final doc...

Author: It looks correct to me?

   In practice, Nix will store the log in `/nix/var/log/nix`)

3. Processing the outputs after the builder has exited.

   The builder process on exit should have left behind files for each output the derivation is supposed to produce.
   The files must be processed to turn them into bona fide store objects.
   If the processing succeeds, those store objects are associated with the derivation as (the results of) a successful build.

Step (3) is done by Nix externally to the build itself, which is just steps (1) and (2).
In step (3), just inert data is processed, since the builder process has exited or been killed by then.
Step (1) however is best described not from Nix's perspective, but from the process's perspective.

> **Explanation**
>
> Ultimately, what matters for determinism is the behavior of IO operations that the process attempts (whether these are successes or failures), because of how they affect the output files, and how they affect the further execution of the builder process.
> From Nix (and the operating system)'s perspective, there are many, many different ways — different implementation strategies — of effecting the same I/O behavior.

> > But from the process's perspective, there is only one correct behavior.

Reviewer 2: What's this supposed to mean? I'm still not really getting it

Author: I can remove it. I am just trying to discuss how this is supposed to be written specification styles, and there are so many implementation strategies (VMs, namespaces, FUSE, bindmounts, etc. etc.) that would satisfy the spec. The builder process should have no idea which method is being used.

## What derivations can be built

Actually only some derivations are ready to be built.
In particular, only [*resolved*](./resolution.md) derivations can be built.

> That is to say, a derivation that depends on other derivations is not ready yet to be built, because some of those other derivations might not have yet been built.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That is to say, a derivation that depends on other (yet unrealised) derivations is not ready yet to be built, because it cannot be resolved.
```

Author: Err my point was a bit different. You can think about it as:

- Only resolved derivations for sure can be built.
- Other derivations by not being resolved have not *proven* they are ready.

In other words,

- to be in-principle ready to be built is to be resolv*able* 
- to be *proven* to be ready to be built is to be resolved.

Is this starting to make more sense?

> If the other derivations are indeed all built, we can witness this fact by resolving the derivation, and converting all the derivation's input references into plain store paths.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> **Note**
>
> Note that [input-addressing](derivation/outputs/input-address.md) derivations are improperly resolved.
> As discussed on the linked page, the current input-addressing algorithm does not respect resolution-equivalence of derivations (\\(\\sim_\mathrm{Drv}\\)).
> That means that if Nix properly resolved an input-addressed derivation, the resolved derivation would have different input addresses, violating expectations.

> > Nix therefore improperly resolves the derivation, keeping its original input address output paths, creating an invalid derivation that is both resolved and instructed to create the outputs at the originally expected paths.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Nix therefore improperly resolves the derivation, keeping its original input-addressed output paths, creating an invalid derivation that is both resolved and instructed to create the outputs at the originally expected paths.
```

## Environment of the builder process

This section describes how the [`builder`](./derivation/index.md#builder) is executed.

> **Implementation detail**
>
> Nix tries to prevent multiple [Nix instances][Nix instance] from performing the same build at the same time, for example by taking locks.

> > This is just an optimisation in the sandboxing case, or best-effort purity in the non-sandboxing case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Nix prevents multiple [Nix instances][Nix instance] from performing the same build at the same time, for example by acquiring exclusive file locks.
```

Let's not document buggy behavior.

### File system

The builder should have access to a limited file system where only certain objects are available.
The most important exposed files are the inputs (other store objects) of the (resolved) derivation.
Additionally, some other files are exposed.

#### Store inputs

The builder will be run against a file system in which the [store directory][store directory path] contains the [closure] of the inputs.
In particular, consider a store that just contains this closure.
That store is exposed to the file system according to the rules specified in the [Exposing Store Objects in OS File Systems](./store-path.md#exposing) documentation.
This precisely defines the file system layout of the store that should be visible to the builder process.

> **Note**
>
> Historically, Nix exposed *at least* the following store contents to the builder, but also arbitrarily other store objects, due to limitations around operating systems' file system virtualization capabilities, and wanting to avoid copying or moving files.
> It still can do this in so-called *unsandboxed* builds.
>

> > Such builds should be considered discouraged, but one that works less badly against non-malicious derivations than might be expected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Such builds should be considered discouraged.
```

It's unclear what a malicious derivation means here. If it's talking about malicious as in trying to achieve privesc or such then the lack of the sandbox is already game over.

Author: It's supposed to discuss that the non-sandboxed builds work surprisingly well for "nice" derivations that might touch the wrong paths by accident but aren't trying to do it on purpose.

A sort of related thing is to imagine if we killed any build which *tried* to open a store path which wasn't in a sandbox. (So as opposed to getting `ENOENT` or similar, the process would just die.) I think most derivations would still work, and these are precisely the derivations would do the same thing with or without sandboxing -- the "nice" derivations.

Reviewer 2: Yeah let's not call those malicious then

> This is because store paths are relatively unpredictable, so a well-behaved program is unlikely to stumble upon a store object it wasn't supposed to know about.
>

> > As operating systems developed better file system primitives, the need for disabling sandboxing has lessened greatly over the years, and this trend should continue into the future.

Reviewer 2: Well, aside from macOS...

The outputs are expected to be created in that store directory as if they were valid store objects.
(They are just files during builder execution, but during [processing outputs](#processing-outputs) they will be turned into proper store objects.)
The [environment variables](#env-vars) for each output indicate where the builder should write them;

> those paths must not yet exist when the builder is run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [environment variables](#env-vars) for each output indicate where the builder should write them;
Nix ensures that those paths do not yet exist when the builder is run.
```

> **Note**
>

> > In sandboxed builds, ensuring that the outputs do not exist in the store directory is trivial.

Reviewer 2: Only the case on Linux/FreeBSD though. Sanboxing is a bit of an overloaded term here... macOS sandbox doesn't allow this, so it might be confusing to the reader.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should differentiate between mechanisms like mount namespaces / jails and other sandboxing measures...

Author: Yeah the macos "sandbox" is like a semi-sandbox? hard to describe.

> This is necessary because these derivations are allowed to access the network, unlike regular derivations which are fully sandboxed.

### Environment variables {#env-vars}

The environment is cleared and set to the derivation attributes, as
specified above.

For most derivations types this must contain at least:

- For each output declared in `outputs`, the corresponding environment variable is set to point to the intended path in the Nix store for that output.
  Each output path is a concatenation of the cryptographic hash of all build inputs, the `name` attribute and the output name.
  (The output name is omitted if it's `out`.)

In addition, the following variables are set:

- `NIX_BUILD_TOP` contains the path of the temporary directory for this build.

- Also, `TMPDIR`, `TEMPDIR`, `TMP`, `TEMP` are set to point to the temporary directory.
  This is to prevent the builder from accidentally writing temporary files anywhere else.
  Doing so might cause interference by other processes.

- `PATH` is set to `/path-not-set` to prevent shells from initialising it to their built-in default value.

- `HOME` is set to `/homeless-shelter`.

>    (Without sandboxing, this serves as "soft sandboxing" --- it discourages programs from using `/etc/passwd` or the like to find the user's home directory, which could cause impurity.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   (Without sandboxing, this discourages programs from using `/etc/passwd` or the like to find the user's home directory, which could cause impurity.)
```
